When I was ten I was suddenly confronted with the anguish of moving from the only home I had ever known. My whole life, brief as it was, had been spent in that big old house, gracefully touched with the laughter and tears of four generations.

When the final day came, I ran to the haven of the small back porch and sat alone, shuddering, as tears welled up from my heart. Suddenly I felt a hand rest on my shoulder. I looked up to see my grandfather. "It isn’t easy, is it, Billy?" he said softly, sitting down on the steps beside me.
"Grandpa," I replied through my tears, "how can I ever say goodbye to you and all my friends?"
For a moment he just stared off into the apple trees. "Goodbye is such a sad word," he said. "It seems too final, too cold, for friends to use. We seem to have so many ways of saying goodbye and they all have one thing in common: sadness."

I continued to look into his face. He gently took my hand in his. "Come with me, my friend," he whispered.

We walked, hand in hand, to his favorite place in the front yard, where a huge red rosebush sat conspicuously alone.

"What do you see here, Billy?" he asked.

I looked at the flowers, not knowing what to say, and then answered, "I see something soft and beautiful, Grandpa."

Kneeling, he pulled me close. "It isn’t just the roses that are beautiful, Billy. It’s that special place in your heart that makes them so."

His eyes met mine again. "Billy, I planted these roses a long, long time ago—before your mother was even a dream. I put them into the soil the day my first son was born. It was my way of saying thank you to God. That boy’s name was Billy, just like yours. I used to watch him pick roses for his mother." I saw my grandfather’s tears. I had never seen him cry before. His voice became hoarse.
"One day a terrible war came, and my son, like so many sons, went away to fight a great evil. He and I walked to the train station together... Ten months later a telegram came. My son had died in some tiny village in Italy. All I could think of was that the last thing I said to him in his life was goodbye." Grandpa slowly stood up. "Don’t ever say goodbye, Billy. Don’t ever give in to the sadness and the loneliness of that word. I want you to remember instead the joy and the happiness of those times when you first said hello to a friend. Take that special hello and lock it away within you—in that place in your heart where summer is an always-time. When you and your friends must part, I want you to reach deep within you and bring back that first hello."

A year and a half later, my grandfather became gravely ill. When he returned after several weeks in the hospital, he wanted his bed next to the window, where he could see his beloved rosebush.

Then the family was summoned, and I returned to the old house. It was decided that the oldest grandchildren would be allowed to say their goodbyes.

When it came to my turn, I noted how tired he looked. His eyes were closed and his breathing was slow and hard. I took his hand as gently as he had once taken mine.

"Hello, Grandpa," I whispered. His eyes slowly opened, "Hello, my friend," he said, with a brief smile. His eyes closed again and I moved on.

I was standing by his rosebush when an uncle came to tell me that my grandfather had died. Remembering Grandpa’s words, I reached deep within me for those special feelings that had made up our friendship. Suddenly, and truly, I knew what he had meant about never saying goodbye—about refusing to give in to sadness.

Youth is not a time of life; it is a state of mind; it is not a matter of rosy cheeks, red lips and supple knees; it is a matter of the will, a quality of the imagination, a vigor of the emotions; it is the freshness of the deep springs of life.

Youth means a temperamental predominance of courage over timidity, of the appetite for adventure over the love of ease. This often exists in a man of 60 more than a boy of 20. Nobody grows old merely by a number of years. We grow old by deserting our ideals.

Years may wrinkle the skin, but to give up enthusiasm wrinkles the soul. Worry, fear, self-distrust bows the heart and turns the spirit back to dust.

Whether 60 or 16, there is in every human being’s heart the lure of wonders, the unfailing appetite for what’s next and the joy of the game of living. In the center of your heart and my heart, there is a wireless station; so long as it receives messages of beauty, hope, courage and power from man and from the infinite, so long as you are young.

When your aerials are down, and your spirit is covered with snows of cynicism and the ice of pessimism, then you’ve grown old, even at 20; but as long as your aerials are up, to catch waves of optimism, there’s hope you may die young at 80.

All of us have read thrilling stories in which the hero had only a limited and specified time to live. Sometimes it was as long as a year, sometimes as short as 24 hours. But always we were interested in discovering just how the doomed hero chose to spend his last days or his last hours. I speak, of course, of free men who have a choice, not condemned criminals whose sphere of activities is strictly delimited.

Such stories set us thinking, wondering what we should do under similar circumstances. What events, what experiences, what associations should we crowd into those last hours as mortal beings, what regrets?

Sometimes I have thought it would be an excellent rule to live each day as if we should die tomorrow. Such an attitude would emphasize sharply the values of life. We should live each day with gentleness, vigor and a keenness of appreciation which are often lost when time stretches before us in the constant panorama of more days and months and years to come. There are those, of course, who would adopt the Epicurean motto of “Eat, drink, and be merry”. But most people would be chastened by the certainty of impending death.

In stories the doomed hero is usually saved at the last minute by some stroke of fortune, but almost always his sense of values is changed. He becomes more appreciative of the meaning of life and its permanent spiritual values. It has often been noted that those who live, or have lived, in the shadow of death bring a mellow sweetness to everything they do.

Most of us, however, take life for granted. We know that one day we must die, but usually we picture that day as far in the future. When we are in buoyant health, death is all but unimaginable. We seldom think of it. The days stretch out in an endless vista. So we go about our petty tasks, hardly aware of our listless attitude toward life.

The same lethargy, I am afraid, characterizes the use of all our faculties and senses. Only the deaf appreciate hearing, only the blind realize the manifold blessings that lie in sight. Particularly does this observation apply to those who have lost sight and hearing in adult life. But those who have never suffered impairment of sight or hearing seldom make the fullest use of these blessed faculties. Their eyes and ears take in all sights and sounds hazily, without concentration and with little appreciation. It is the same old story of not being grateful for what we have until we lose it, of not being conscious of health until we are ill.

I have often thought it would be a blessing if each human being were stricken blind and deaf for a few days at some time during his early adult life. Darkness would make him more appreciative of sight; silence would teach him the joys of sound.